zen of nim transcript (#299)
nim-lang/website: jekyll/_posts/2021-11-15.md

how about you make the interoperability with these systems very good".

We do not want Nim to be just one language out of many and then you use different programming languages
to accomplish your system. Ideally, you only use the Nim language because that is much cheaper to do.
Then you can hire programmers that only know a single programming language rather than four (or whatever you need).

The interoperability story goes so far that we actually offer an `emit` statement where you can directly put
foreign code into your Nim code and the compiler merges these two things together in the final file.

Here is an example:

```nim
{.emit: """
static int cvariable = 420;
""".}

proc embedsC() =
  var nimVar = 89
  {.emit: ["""fprintf(stdout, "%d\n", cvariable + (int)""",
    nimVar, ");"].}

embedsC()
```
You can emit a `static int cvariable` and the communication is two way,
so you can emit a `fprintf` statement where the variable `nimVar` is actually coming from Nim
(using the bracket notation you can have both strings and name expressions in the same environment).
The C code can use Nim code and viceversa.
However, this is really not a good way to do this interfacing,

> it is just showing that we want you to be able to get things done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it is just to show that we want you to be able to get things done.
```

A much better way for interoperability is where you can actually tell Nim: "hey, there is an `fprintf` function, 
it is coming from C and these are its types, I want to be able to call it".

> Still, this `emit` pragma gets the point across very well that **we want this language to be practical**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Still, the `emit` pragma gets the point across very well that **we want this language to be practical**.
```

## Customizable memory management

Now a different topic, so far we did not talk about memory management.

> In the newer nim versions it is based on destructors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the newer Nim versions it is based on destructors
```

> and it is called `gc:arc` and `gc:orc` mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and it is called the `gc:arc` or `gc:orc` mode.
```

> Destructor and ownerships are hopefully familiar notions from C++ and Rust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Destructors and ownership are hopefully familiar notions from C++ and Rust.
```

The `sink` parameter here means that the function gets ownership of the string
(and then it does not do anything with `x`):

```nim
func f(x: sink string) =
  discard "do nothing"

f "abc"
```

The question is: "did I produce a memory leak? what happens?".
You can ask the Nim compiler:

> "hey, expand this function `f` for me; show me where destructors are, where moves are performed,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"hey, expand this function `f` for me; show me where the destructors are, where moves are performed,
```

where deep copies are performed"
(compile with `nim c --gc:orc --expandArc:f $file`).

The compiler would tell you "look, function `f` is actually your discard statement and I added this call

> to the destructor at the end:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the destructor at the end":
```

```nim
func f(x: sink string) =
  discard "do nothing"
  `=destroy`(x)
```

The nice thing is that **Nim's intermediate language is Nim itself**,
so Nim is this one language that can express everything very well.

Here I have a different example:

```nim
var g: string

proc f(x: sink string) =
  g = x

f "abc"
```

> Now I take ownership of `x` and I really do something with the ownership,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This time I take ownership of `x` and I really do something with the ownership,
```

namely I put `x` into this global variable `g`.
Again, we can ask the compiler what does it do and the compiler says:
"this is a move operation, it is called `=sink`".
So we move the `x` into the `g` and the move takes care of freeing what is inside the `g`

> (if there is something) and then takes `x` value over:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(if there is something) and then it takes `x`'s value over:
```

```nim
var g: string

proc f(x: sink string) =
  `=sink`(g, x)

f "abc"
```

What it really did, and unfortunately that is not really visible here, is that
it says: "okay, `x` is moved into `g` and then we say `x` was moved

> and call the destructor", but this `wasMoved` and `=destroy` call cancel out so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and call the destructor", but these `wasMoved` and `=destroy` calls cancel out so
```

> that the compiler optimized this out for us:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that the compiler optimized this for us:
```

proc `=destroy`*[T](x: var myseq[T]) =
  if x.data != nil:
    for i in 0..<x.len: `=destroy`(x[i])
    dealloc(x.data)
```

**Move operator**:

```nim
proc `=sink`*[T](a: var myseq[T]; b: myseq[T]) =
  # move assignment, optional.
  # Compiler is using `=destroy` and
  # `copyMem` when not provided
  `=destroy`(a)
  a.len = b.len
  a.cap = b.cap
  a.data = b.data
```

**Assignment operator**:

```nim
proc `=copy`*[T](a: var myseq[T]; b: myseq[T]) =
  # do nothing for self-assignments:
  if a.data == b.data: return
  `=destroy`(a)
  a.len = b.len
  a.cap = b.cap
  if b.data != nil:
    a.data = cast[typeof(a.data)](
      alloc(a.cap * sizeof(T)))
    for i in 0..<a.len:
      a.data[i] = b.data[i]
```

**Accessors**

```nim
proc add*[T](x: var myseq[T]; y: sink T) =
  if x.len >= x.cap: resize(x)
  x.data[x.len] = y
  inc x.len

proc `[]`*[T](x: myseq[T]; i: Natural): lent T =
  assert i < x.len
  x.data[i]

proc `[]=`*[T](x: var myseq[T]; i: Natural; y: sink T) =
  assert i < x.len
  x.data[i] = y
```

The point here is that destrctors, move operators, ... can be written by you for your
custom containers and then they work well with Nim's built-in containers,

> but it also gives you a very precise control over the memory allocations and how they are done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but it also gives you very precise control over the memory allocations and how they are done.
```

So another Zen rule is:

> Customizable memory management

## Zen of Nim

Here are the rules once again as a summary:

- **Copying bad design is not good design**: we want to create good design by reasoning from first principles
  about the problem.
- **If the compiler cannot reason about the code, neither can the programmer**,
- however, **don't get in the programmer's way**. The compiler is a smart dog: you can teach it new tricks
  and it really helps you out, it can perform tasks for you like carrying a newspaper, but in the end
  the programmer is still smarter than the compiler.
- We want to **move work to compile-time** because **programs are run more often than they are compiled**,
- we want **customizable memory management** and
- **concise code is not in conflict with readability, it enables readability**.
- There was this rule of Zen that was like **Leverage meta programming to keep the language small**,
  however it is hard to say that and keep a straight face when Nim really offers quite a lot of features.
  There is a friction between "we want the language to be complete" and "we want the language to be minimal".

>   The older Nim gets and the more Nim is about we want the language to be complete (minimal languages all grow to serve certain needs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The older Nim gets the more Nim is about completeness (minimal languages all grow to serve certain needs).
```

- **Optimization is specialization**. I have not talked about this yet, but **when you need more speed**,
  you should really consider to **write custom code**. The Nim standard library cannot offer everything to everybody
  and for us it is also much harder to give you the best library for everything, because the best library must be general purpose, 
  it must be the fastest library, it must have the least amount of overhead for your compile times and that is very hard to accomplish.

>   What is much easier is just to say "ok, Nim offers this as a standard library, but here I wrote this myself in 10 lines and I can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It is much easier to say "ok, Nim offers this as a standard library, but here I wrote this myself in 10 lines and I can
```

>   benchmark it and usually my custom code is faster, because it is hand tailored for the application that I am writing".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  benchmark it and usually my custom code is faster, because it is hand tailored to the application that I am writing".
```
